## Blog Runner
### ...a lightweight static blog generator for JavaScript developers

I've published a few posts so far about the tech behind this blog (like [these](/blog/2014/12/03/blog-tech-1/) [posts](/blog/2015/05/04/blog-tech-2/) on Jekyll, and [this post](/blog/2015/06/30/workflow-part-1/) on incorporating the blog into my build process). Hopefully you get a chance to go through those at some point, as they're meant to be step-by-step discussions of what ended up being a fairly widely-used build tool in Jekyll. Today, though, I'm announcing that my use of Jekyll on this blog has come to an end. Today, I made the switch to Blog Runner (GitHub repo [here](https://github.com/NAlexPear/blog-runner) and `npm` module page [here](https://www.npmjs.com/package/blog-runner)).

Now, you've probably never heard of this tool (*cue hipster glasses*). But that's OK, because it's brand new, and built just for me. Well, not just for me, but certainly just *by* me, and for the very specific use of building this blog (or blogs like it). The goal is to package up just the tools that I have needed from Jekyll while abstracting away those configurables and options that aren't needed for this blog. Or, I would argue, for *most* blogs.

So what's wrong with Jekyll? Nothing, really... there's lots of exciting stuff going on in the world of Jekyll, and I still use it every day for production sites like the [Savvy Coders home page and blog](https://savvycoders.com). It's extremely powerful, totally customize-able, and impressively fast with the new update to 3.0. That said, there were still some major pain points that affected my personal workflow, including the following:

1. **Jekyll is written in Ruby, for Ruby devs**. This shouldn't be a surprise to anyone, of course. But as much as I think Ruby is a fun language, and as mature and stable as Ruby development for the Web has gotten, I still prefer `npm` over `gem`, a `package.json` over `Gemfile`, and coding, building, and deploying with JavaScript tools. It's just personal preference (and my job), but the disconnect between Jekyll the Ruby Gem and the rest of my environment lead to a few other problems, like...
2. **Jekyll doesn't play nicely with Gulp/streams/others during builds**. Nobody has *really* solved the issue of running Jekyll as a part of a build process with a task runner like Gulp. Sure, you can [spawn a child process](http://blog.webbb.be/use-jekyll-with-gulp/) or execute Jekyll from a build script. I've done both, with varying levels of success. It's still a pain, though, to move between multiple terminals, `*.sh` files, or hope that a child process through Gulp runs as you'd like it to. Which it probably won't, because I never figured out a way to get a child-process-spawned Jekyll command to return any kind of Promise or play nicely with Gulp Streams. Because Gulp is asynchronous by default, there was no waiting for Jekyll to finish building. So Jekyll always had to be run as a separate command (again, either as a task in Gulp, from the command line directly, or as part of a shell script), since it wouldn't ever fit nicely into streams. Blegh. *NOTE: if anyone has a solution to the streaming problem, post it to the comments!*
3. **YAML is silly**. Jekyll requires `YAML` for every post and page, and I think that's silly in most cases for most people. Much simpler to get all of that information from `_include`s, filenames, and a strictly-enforced directory structure.
4. **Jekyll is OP (for me)**. While it's great to be able to `build`, `watch`, and `serve` a site, I want to do all of those things myself. I already need to set up `gulp.watch` tasks for SASS (which integrates very nicely with Gulp, by the way), and I'm not usually using Jekyll to build an entire site, so `build` should be able to be called as a part of a larger build process, and `serve` should happen in a different place altogether. In fact, all of those things should be taken care of in a `gulpfile`. So, really, my blog builder only needs to return a single `build` command that can be called on a specific `source` directory from Gulp. Nothing fancy!
5. **Liquid Markup is OP (and oversteps some boundaries)**. As a rule of thumb, if content needs to be generated programmatically, I'd prefer that to happen in a separate script file (in my case, probably a `*.js` file) rather than inside `HTML`. While it's unavoidable in some larger apps (and it's embraced whole-heartedly by many frameworks), creating components out of Liquid-based `for` loops and `if-else` statements seems too convoluted for a simple blog. Especially when every blogger needs those things for simple things like an index view of recent posts or an archive view of all posts, and *not much else*. If the relevant information is provided as a `JSON`-formatted Object during the build process, savvy programmers should be able to create their own mixins programmatically without needing to relay on yet another type of markup.
6. **Liquid Markup doesn't Markdown**. The code snippets you see in this blog are all written in markdown... sort of. Liquid defaulted to a different kind of syntax highlighting and often needed escape characters or special markup when trying to write about Liquid Markup itself (using something nasty like `{% raw %}` and `{% endraw %}` wrappers). In Liquid, the previous sentence would have thrown an error or gone haywire without some extra markup. I like Markdown just fine, thank you very much, and it would be nice to use it all of the time without worrying about additional grammar.
7. **Jekyll requires a lot of programming knowledge to get started**. If you want an index view of posts on your landing page, you have to make it yourself out of Liquid-based `for` loops. That's tough for a beginner. Instead, it would be nice if Jekyll returned at least a couple of components out of the box. Good candidates for components might be the landing page index view, or an archive view, or a search tool. And these could be packaged as includes, for users to add to their pages or to ignore.

These 7 points are why I created Blog Runner. I'll make a separate post later about more of the specifics and about what features I'd like to add in the future. But for now, if you like the idea of a simple, JavaScript-based `npm` package that will build your static blog quickly, without `YAML`, and without superfluous markup in your `HTML`, give Blog Runner a try!
